## 1.Introduction

<span id='1-introduction'></span>

#### _1.1 Introduction to Uniswap V4_

<span id='1-1-introduction-to-uniswap-v4'></span>

In the world of decentralized finance, the names [Uniswap](https://uniswap.org/)
and Automated Market Makers (AMMs) have likely graced your ears. Yet, if the
realm of Uniswap remains an uncharted domain for you, brace yourself for an
enlightening journey. At its core, Uniswap emerges as a fully decentralized
protocol tailored for the provision of automated liquidity within the Ethereum
ecosystem. To simplify, envision a decentralized exchange (DEX) powered by
external liquidity providers who seamlessly contribute tokens to smart contract
pools, thereby enabling users to engage in direct trading. This article embarks
on an exploration of Uniswap V4's intricate facets, unveiling its transformative
features and mechanisms that are poised to redefine the DeFi landscape as we
know it.

#### _1.2 Significance of Uniswap in the DeFi Ecosystem_

<span id='1-2-significance-of-uniswap-in-the-defi-ecosystem'></span>

For numerous years, Uniswap has stood as the quintessential benchmark for
decentralized exchanges. Across various blockchain networks, it reigns supreme
as the protocol with the most substantial _Total Value Locked (TVL)_, surging to
an impressive $9.96 billion on the [Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/en/) main
chain alone. The imminent arrival of Uniswap V4 heralds a watershed moment,
destined to redefine the decentralized finance landscape. This upcoming
iteration promises to be a game-changer, setting a new precedent that will
resonate far and wide within the DeFi ecosystem.

#### _1.3 Overview of Uniswap V4 codebase_

<span id='1-3-overview-of-uniswap-v4-codebase'></span>

The protocol as always is divided into two repositories: a core and a periphery.
The most relevant contracts contained by this repositores are:

- [v4-core](https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-core): contains all the core logic of
  the protocol:
  - PoolManager.sol: the huge contract containing all the pools.
  - Fees.sol: contract for managing and collecting of pool fees.
- [v4-periphery](https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-periphery): meant to be used by
  other develpers who want to implement or innovate on top of the protocol.
  - BaseHook.sol: a base contract to develop a custom hook from.

## 2.Key Features of Uniswap V4

<span id='2-key-features-of-uniswap-v4'></span>

#### _2.1 Singleton Contract_

<span id='2-1-singleton-contract'></span>

In a twist that defies convention, Uniswap V4 introduces an intriguing paradigm:
all pools will find their abode within a single, unified contract. While this
approach might appear counterintuitive, given the prevailing wisdom of
dispersing protocol functions across distinct contracts, its brilliance lies in
the realm of capital efficiency.

Contrasting the current V3 iteration, where each swap triggers the movement of
tokens through individual pool contracts, the V4's singleton contract
facilitates internal swaps. This novel mechanism yields a remarkable reduction
in gas costs for multihop swaps.

##### _2.1.1 Trading through smart contracts_

<span id='2-1-1-trading-though-smart-contracts'></span>

Trading from _externally owned accounts (EOAs)_ will not be directly permissible
within the singleton contract. Instead, traders will interact with the main
contract through an intermediary contract. This architectural choice primarily
serves efficiency objectives, as it empowers traders to invoke multiple
functions within the main contract securely and with enhanced efficiency.

This streamlined approach will occur within a single transaction, facilitated by
a callback mechanism. The adjustment of internal balances will be achieved
through this new system, where the caller contract can withdraw the internal
balance at the end of the interaction calling the _settle_ function.

##### _2.1.2 Full contract locking_

<span id='2-1-2-full-contract-locking'></span>

In the previous version, a _reentrancy lock_ was used to protect contract from
reentrancy attacks when calling a function. But this would happen in every
function, so if traders wanted to call many functions concurrently, they would
just lock and unlock the contract many times, wasting gas. The new contract will
be locked entirely at the beginning of the interaction, and unlocked at the end.

##### _2.1.3 Implementation example_

<span id='2-1-3-implementation-example'></span>

The contract is locked by calling the _lock_ function.

```solidity
  // PoolManager.sol
    function lock(bytes calldata data) external
    override returns (bytes memory result) {
        lockData.push(msg.sender);

        // the caller does everything in this callback,
        // including paying what they owe via calls to settle
        result = ILockCallback(msg.sender).lockAcquired(data);

        if (lockData.length == 1) {
            if (lockData.nonzeroDeltaCount != 0) revert CurrencyNotSettled();
            delete lockData;
        } else {
            lockData.pop();
        }
    }
```

The calling contract will need to follow _ILockCallback_ implementation, here's
an example:

```solidity
function lock(bytes calldata data) public payable {
    poolManager.lock(data);
}

function lockAcquired(uint256, bytes calldata data) external returns (bytes memory) {
    if (msg.sender == address(poolManager)) {
        revert OnlyPoolManager();
    }

    (bool success, bytes memory returnData) = address(this).call(data);

    if (success) return returnData;
    if (returnData.length == 0) revert LockFailure();

    assembly {
        revert(add(returnData, 32), mload(returnData))
    }
}

function swapTokens(
    IPoolManager.PoolKey calldata poolKey,
    IPoolManager.SwapParams calldata swapParams,
    uint256 deadline
) external returns (bytes memory) {
    // old logic from the previous `lockAcquired`
}
```

After the trader contract calls the _PoolManager_ this will call the caller back
though the _lockAcquired_ function, where trader's desired calls happen.

#### _2.2 Hooks_

<span id='2-2-hooks'></span>

Hooks allow developer to add their custom functionality on top of a pool, just
like a plugin in a application. Developers will need to implement the hook
standard provided by Uniswap.

##### _2.2.1 Configuration_

<span id='2-2-1-configuration'></span>

Depending on the desired implementation, the hooks can be set up to be called in
specific moments:

- Before pool initialization
- After pool initialization
- Before every swap
- After every swap
- Before every donation
- After every donation

```solidity
// BaeHook.sol
    function beforeInitialize(address, PoolKey calldata, uint160, bytes calldata) external virtual returns (bytes4) {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function afterInitialize(address, PoolKey calldata, uint160, int24, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function beforeModifyPosition(address, PoolKey calldata, IPoolManager.ModifyPositionParams calldata, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function afterModifyPosition(
        address,
        PoolKey calldata,
        IPoolManager.ModifyPositionParams calldata,
        BalanceDelta,
        bytes calldata
    ) external virtual returns (bytes4) {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function beforeSwap(address, PoolKey calldata, IPoolManager.SwapParams calldata, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function afterSwap(address, PoolKey calldata, IPoolManager.SwapParams calldata, BalanceDelta, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function beforeDonate(address, PoolKey calldata, uint256, uint256, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        // remove the revert and introduce desired implementation
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }

    function afterDonate(address, PoolKey calldata, uint256, uint256, bytes calldata)
        external
        virtual
        returns (bytes4)
    {
        revert HookNotImplemented();
    }
```

For a hook to be valid it it's functions must return their own function
selector. A function selector equals the first 4 bytes of the hash of the
function signature:

```solidity
function foo(uint256 dumbParam) public view returns(bytes4 selector){
  selector = bytes4(keccak256("foo(uint256)"));
}
```

##### _2.2.2 Using addresses as bitmaps_

<span id='2-2-2-using-addresses-as-bitmaps'></span>

_Bitmaps_ are very handy in solidity since they allow contracts to pack data in
a efficient way to read, using binary operators. In this case, hooks addresses
themselves will be used to check hooks configuration. The reasons behind this is
that reading from an address from a smart contract is very cheap since it's a
context value.

```solidity
//libraries/Hooks.sol
    // if the first bit of the address in binaryis 1,
    // the hook is meant to be called to beforeInitialize()
    // binary representation(160 bits):
    // 1000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
    uint256 internal constant BEFORE_INITIALIZE_FLAG = 1 << 159;
    // second bit for after initialize()
    // 0100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
    uint256 internal constant AFTER_INITIALIZE_FLAG = 1 << 158;
    //...
    uint256 internal constant BEFORE_MODIFY_POSITION_FLAG = 1 << 157;
    uint256 internal constant AFTER_MODIFY_POSITION_FLAG = 1 << 156;
    uint256 internal constant BEFORE_SWAP_FLAG = 1 << 155;
    uint256 internal constant AFTER_SWAP_FLAG = 1 << 154;
    uint256 internal constant BEFORE_DONATE_FLAG = 1 << 153;
    uint256 internal constant AFTER_DONATE_FLAG = 1 << 152;

```

For example, if an address' binary representation looks like
_11010101010101010101010101..._ , this hook will use the next functions:
_beforeInitialize,afterInitialize, beforeModifyPosition,beforeSwap_...

We can see that when using a pool in the main contract(_PoolManager_) the
contract always checks what functions should call to the hook of that specific
pool:

```solidity
// IPoolManager
    function modifyPosition(
        PoolKey memory key,
        IPoolManager.ModifyPositionParams memory params,
        bytes calldata hookData
    ) external override noDelegateCall onlyByLocker returns (BalanceDelta delta) {
      // check if it should calling
        if (key.hooks.shouldCallBeforeModifyPosition()) {
            if (
              // checks that the function returns it's selector as mentioned before
                key.hooks.beforeModifyPosition(msg.sender, key, params, hookData)
                    != IHooks.beforeModifyPosition.selector
            ) {
                revert Hooks.InvalidHookResponse();
            }
        }
        //...
```

##### _2.2.3 Deploying a hook with an address that meets this requirements_

<span id='2-2-3-deploying a hook with an address that meets this requirements'></span>

Ensuring the congruence of a hook's binary address representation with its
configuration is a pivotal concern. But how can we achieve this assurance
without resorting to a trial-and-error barrage of deployments? Enter Solidity's
ingenious solution: the _CREATE2_ opcode. This opcode empowers a smart contract
to deterministically deploy another contract, leveraging a cryptographic
salt—essentially a 32-byte seed that computes the forthcoming address.

The beauty of this approach lies in its predictability; the new address can be
computed even before the deployment is executed, contingent solely on
identifying the correct seed. For an in-depth exploration of this concept, the
implementation of _CREATE2_ in the
[Solady](https://github.com/Vectorized/solady/blob/main/src/utils/CREATE3.sol)
library offers a compelling resource.

#### _2.3 Infinite Pools per Pair_

<span id='2-3-infinite-pools-per-pair'></span>

In the previous V3 model iteration, a singular pool was allocated for each pair.
However, the current contract introduces a dynamic paradigm, enabling
individuals to craft custom pools tailored to specific pairs. This innovation
heralds a diverse array of pools, each unique to its corresponding pair and
distinguished by custom hooks and distinct fee structures.

#### _2.4 Native ETH Support_

<span id='2-4-native-eth-support'></span>

For some reason, the V3 version removed the native ETH support, to only support
_ERC20_ swaps. This forces traders to wrap their ETH into WETH ERC20 contract or
viceversa before a swap implying ETH. Considering this problem de developers
team decided to add native ETH support back.

#### _2.5 ERC1155 Liquidity Accounting_

<span id='2-5-erc1155-accounting'></span>

Previously, our method for accounting liquidity provider positions involved
using an ERC20 token that was minted to the required amount for each provider.
Each pool had its dedicated ERC20 token representing a liquidity position within
that specific pool. However, we've undergone significant changes. With all pools
now consolidated into a single, unified smart contract, we have adopted a new
approach using _ERC1155_ tokens. These tokens enable the management of multiple
positions within a single token, allowing us to efficiently oversee all
liquidity provider positions from a single, centralized smart contract.

## 3.Implications for Traders and Liquidity Providers

<span id='3-implications-for-traders-and-liquidity-providers'></span>

#### _3.1 Benefits and Drawbacks of AMMs_

<span id='3-1-benefits-and-drawbacks-of-amms'></span>

##### _3.1.1 Liquidity concentration_

<span id='3-1-1-liquidity-concentration'></span>

Uniswap V4 will seamlessly retain the concentrated liquidity mechanism
introduced in V3. This empowers liquidity providers to infuse liquidity within
specific price ranges, a strategic approach stemming from the insight that the
entire price curve is seldom utilized. Analogous to leveraging, this tactic can
yield augmented profits or amplified losses, often referred to as a more
substantial _impermanent loss_, compared to the broader spectrum liquidity
provision.

For a comprehensive understanding of the concept of concentrated liquidity, I
recommend delving into this enlightening
[article](https://medium.com/pontem-network/concentrated-liquidity-beginner-guide-to-uniswap-v3-liquidity-book-3ecf806f2b10)..
The article elucidates the nuances of this approach, providing valuable insights
into the inner workings of Uniswap V3's liquidity book.

##### _3.1.2 Impermanent loss_

<span id='3-1-2-impermanent-loss'></span>

In the realm of _Constant Product AMMs_, liquidity providers participate by
adding liquidity to a specific pair through the deposit of an amount of token A,
proportionally balanced with an amount of token B, as dictated by their
prevailing price relationship. Over the course of their liquidity provision,
market prices may undergo fluctuations, leading to corresponding shifts in the
reserve quantities of token A and token B.

Upon the eventual withdrawal of liquidity, both token A and token B are
retrieved. However, the proportions between these two token amounts may have
evolved due to alterations in the reserves. Consequently, even though the
liquidity provider reclaims their initial shares of liquidity along with the
accumulated fees—thus accruing more tokens than before—there exists the
possibility of incurring a loss when measured in total USD value.

For those eager to explore this concept further, I recommend delving into this
insightful
[article](https://medium.com/coinmonks/impermanent-loss-what-is-it-and-when-does-this-phenomenon-appear-df9b29212509).
The article delves deeper into the intricacies of impermanent loss, shedding
light on its occurrence and implications.

#### _3.2 Enhanced pools for traders_

<span id='3-2-enhanced-pools-for-traders'></span>

This are some interestig pool implementations proposed by Uniswap:

##### _3.3.1 TWAMM_

<span id='3-3-1-twamm'></span>

Introducing TWAMM, or _Time Weighted Average Market Maker_ – an ingenious
solution offering traders an efficient and cost-effective method for executing
substantial swaps. Tackling a historical challenge for traders, TWAMM emerges as
a viable alternative. Traditional methods, such as conducting large transactions
within a single pool, tend to yield significant impermanent losses. On the other
hand, fragmenting orders across multiple Automated Market Makers (AMMs) can
result in exorbitant fee payments.

The underpinning idea draws inspiration from the concept of _Time Weighted
Average Price_ (TWAP) that traders employ. In the TWAP strategy, periodic
selling is executed to achieve a desired average price over a specific duration.

TWAMMs provide users the ability to dissect their sell orders into an infinite
series of smaller segments. A noteworthy feature is that all orders seeking to
sell the same asset within a particular pool are executed concurrently by the
TWAMM contract. This seamless orchestration is automatically facilitated through
a hook. The hook oversees the execution of required sell actions within the
previously mentioned _afterSwap()_ and _afterModifyPosition()_ special
functions. These functions are triggered periodically by the pool.

For further reading : [link](https://www.paradigm.xyz/2021/07/twamm)

##### _3.3.2 Limit orders_

<span id='3-3-2-limit-orders'></span>

Users will be able to place limit orders using a hook. This is a game changer
when it comes to trading. The defi landscape is catching up the centralised
finance day by day.

##### _3.3.3 Full range liquidity_

<span id='3-3-3-full-range-liquidity'></span>

Regrettably, many inexperienced liquidity providers faced substantial
impermanent losses in the prior version, primarily due to the concentrated
liquidity feature. To address this concern, the introduced hook offers a
solution: the ability to establish liquidity positions that encompass the entire
price range. While this adjustment might lead to a decrease in profits for
favorable positions, it undeniably serves as a mitigation strategy against
potential risks.

##### _3.3.4 Geomean oracle_

<span id='3-3-4-geomean-oracle'></span>

This hook will allow pools to work as a decentralised oracle themselves. This
kind of oracles will definitely be very useful for the defi ecosystem, including
traders, yeild farmers, and other contracts implementing Uniswap V4.

##### _3.3.5 Volatility oracles_

<span id='3-3-5-volatility-oracles'></span>

Dynamic fees will definitely be a thing in Uniswap V4. Volatility oracles just
sets the pool fees based on the volatility of it.

#### _3.4 Uniswap X_

<span id='3-4-uniswap-x'></span>

"UniswapX is an ERC20 swap settlement protocol that provides swappers with a
gasless experience, MEV protection, and access to arbitrary liquidity sources.
Swappers generate signed orders which specify the specification of their swap,
and fillers compete using arbitrary fill strategies to satisfy these orders." -
Uniswap docs.

Just for a brief overview, this means that traders will be able to perform swaps
without paying any gas when using the dapp. Furthermore, failed transactions
won't be charged to traders. This could be the beginning of the next web3
generation.

Full detailed overview in the Uniswap
[documentation](https://docs.uniswap.org/contracts/uniswapx/overview)

## 4.Future Implications and Challenges

<span id='4-future-implications-and-challenges'></span>

#### _4.1 Potential Competition and Innovations in Response_

<span id='4-1-potential-competition-and-innovation-in-response'></span>

Given this new powerfull infraestructure, the spectrum of potential pool
variations is boundless. As these pools multiply exponentially, a dynamic
landscape of competition for liquidity will naturally emerge. This competition
serves as a catalyst, propelling developers to craft pools that transcend
convention, embodying both innovation and profitability.

In this environment teeming with potential, developers are poised to illuminate
the DeFi sphere with their creativity. This juncture marks a golden opportunity
for their ingenuity to take center stage. As they conjure inventive and
appealing pool structures, the entire ecosystem stands to benefit from enhanced
liquidity options, fostering a thriving DeFi landscape.

#### _4.2 Security and Smart Contract Audits_

<span id='4-2-security-and-smart-contract-audits'></span>

One of the major drawbacks associated with UniswapV4 pertains to its
concentration of liquidity within a single contract. This concentration creates
an attractive opportunity for potential hackers or malicious actors, often
referred to as "_black hats_," who might attempt to exploit vulnerabilities in
the system.

Given this security vulnerability, it becomes crucial to invest a significant
amount of time in comprehensive audits and bug bounty programs. These measures
are necessary to bolster the platform's security and ensure that potential risks
are mitigated effectively. By subjecting UniswapV4 to thorough security
assessments and incentivizing the community to actively participate in
identifying and rectifying vulnerabilities, steps can be taken to prevent
adverse events from occurring.

## 5.Conclusion

<span id='5-conclusion'></span>

As we conclude our journey through the intricate web of Uniswap V4's features
and implications, a new horizon of possibilities opens up for the decentralized
finance landscape. Uniswap V4 represents a paradigm shift, introducing
innovative mechanisms that challenge existing norms and elevate the potential
for traders, liquidity providers, and developers alike.

The introduction of a singleton contract architecture brings forth efficiency
gains, paving the way for multihop swaps with reduced gas costs. Hooks, as
customizable and extendable components, invite developers to shape the ecosystem
with tailored solutions, giving birth to concepts like the Time Weighted Average
Market Maker (TWAMM) and decentralized oracles.

This transformation also ushers in a realm of opportunities and challenges.
Developers are poised to shine as they compete to craft alluring and productive
pools, driving innovation to new heights. However, the concentration of
liquidity within a single contract raises security concerns, necessitating a
rigorous approach to audits and bug bounties to safeguard the ecosystem against
potential vulnerabilities.

As Uniswap V4 takes center stage in the DeFi arena, it's evident that the
decentralized landscape is undergoing a remarkable evolution. The collaborative
efforts of developers, traders, liquidity providers, and security experts will
shape the future of DeFi, offering greater flexibility, efficiency, and
accessibility for all participants. With boundless possibilities ahead, we stand
on the cusp of a transformative era, where Uniswap V4 plays a pivotal role in
shaping the decentralized financial ecosystem for years to come.

## 6.Glossary

<span id='6-glossary'></span>

#### _6.1 Key Terms and Concepts_

<span id='6-1-key-terms-and-concepts'></span>

**Automated Market Maker (AMM)**: A decentralized exchange protocol that enables
users to trade cryptocurrencies without relying on traditional order books. AMMs
utilize smart contracts and liquidity pools to determine asset prices and
execute trades automatically.

**Concentrated Liquidity**: A mechanism introduced in Uniswap V3 and continued
in V4, where liquidity providers concentrate their assets within specific price
ranges, optimizing capital efficiency while potentially exposing them to
impermanent loss.

**Decentralized Finance (DeFi)**: A movement that aims to recreate traditional
financial services using blockchain technology and smart contracts. DeFi
platforms provide decentralized alternatives to traditional financial
intermediaries, such as banks, brokers, and exchanges.

**ERC20**: Ethereum Request for Comments 20, a widely adopted standard for
fungible tokens on the Ethereum blockchain. ERC20 tokens are interchangeable and
can represent various assets, from cryptocurrencies to digital assets.

**Gas Costs**: In Ethereum, gas refers to the computational effort required to
execute operations or transactions on the blockchain. Gas costs are denominated
in Ether (ETH) and are necessary to incentivize miners to process transactions.

**Impermanent Loss**: A potential loss experienced by liquidity providers in
automated market maker pools due to the changing relative prices of assets
within the pool compared to holding those assets outside the pool.

**Liquidity Providers**: Individuals or entities that contribute assets to
liquidity pools on AMMs. In return, they receive a share of trading fees and
incentives from the protocol.

**Singleton Contract**: In Uniswap V4, a design choice where all pools are
managed within a single contract. This architecture optimizes gas efficiency and
facilitates multihop swaps.

**Smart Contract Audits**: Comprehensive reviews conducted by security experts
to identify vulnerabilities and potential risks in smart contracts. Audits are
crucial to ensure the security and reliability of protocols and applications.

**Time Weighted Average Market Maker (TWAMM)**: An innovative trading mechanism
introduced in Uniswap V4 that allows users to execute large trades over time,
minimizing the impact on prices and providing protection against front-running
and other forms of market manipulation.

**Total Value Locked (TVL)**: The total amount of assets locked within a
decentralized finance protocol. TVL is a common metric used to assess the
adoption and growth of DeFi platforms.

**Vulnerabilities**: Weaknesses or flaws in software code that could be
exploited by attackers to compromise the security or functionality of a system.
Vulnerabilities in smart contracts can lead to financial losses and other
undesirable outcomes.

## 7.References

<span id='7-references'></span>

#### _7.1 List of Sources and Further Reading_

<span id='7-1-list-of-sources-and-further-reading'></span>

- [https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-periphery](https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-periphery)
- [https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-core](https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-core)
- [https://blog.uniswap.org/uniswap-v4](https://blog.uniswap.org/uniswap-v4)
- [https://soliditydeveloper.com/uniswap4](https://soliditydeveloper.com/uniswap4)
